The way we organize our work has a profound effect on our lives. Raj Sisodia has
spent much of his life investigating, describing, and advocating for one
particular way of organizing work, which he calls "Conscious Capitalism". For
Long Now Boston's February gathering, he presented some of his thinking on this
topic.

The premise of Sisodia's model, which is largely based on case studied of
existing and successful companies such as Whole Foods and Southwest Airlines, is
that it is difficult or impossible for companies to buy customer loyalty through
traditional marketing approaches such as ad campaigns and branding, and instead
companies do better to earn this loyalty by adopting a broader sense of
community and purpose, and letting that sense of community and purpose drive
business decisions. He proposes that, far from being an idealistic and
unrealistic visionary, better adopted as posture than as practice, that actual
adoption of this strategy is in fact the winning move for businesses competing
in today's market.

The Conscious Capital strategy starts from the premise that "maximize
shareholder value" is a broken model for organizing a business, and that instead
businesses should be managed to improve outcomes for the broader community of
stakeholders, which include (at a minimum) employees, customers, suppliers, and,
yes, investors. The claim is that companies which successfully satisfy their
involved communities of interest will incur lower costs of doing business, see
more innovation from within their operations, and gain a more engaged customer
base with reduced marketing investment, and ultimately experience better
and more stable profitability over time than companies which manage for maximal
share price at the end of the quarter. It is not hard to conceive of examples to
help Sisodia make his case, for example an engaged workforce enjoying a
relationship of trust with management could easily be expected to innovate on
their work processes, and to do so more effectively than outside consultants
would be able to do - and for free. Suppliers enjoying a fruitful long-term
relationship with a company could be seen to be more likely to work to make that
relationship work to both partners' mutual benefit, since they have evidence
that there is a partnership to improve, rather than a simple relationship of
convenience to service. Customers who trust a company to act in an ethical
fashion and in accordance with their values will prefer to do business with that
company, even at a premium price. And shareholders who believe that the company
is pursuing a worthwhile mission will presumably be willing to sacrifice
quick profits in favor of long-term sustained returns.

At least, this is Sisodia's pitch to the business community. It is largely based
on what we might call "significant intangibles" - factors which we're willing to
believe have a pronounced effect on operating a business, but which are hard to
measure in any concrete way, or even to define in rigid terms - and supported by
anecdote and acronym, and appeal to well-known successes. Sisodia elaborates on
this pitch with appeals to the business owner's self-image as a caring, decent
person who doesn't want to be awful to others, and he is right to do so: most of
us are, as best we are able to be, caring and decent people, and most of us want
to not be awful to others, if we can help it. In fact, we would prefer to treat
people well, if we can afford to do so, and Sisodia is here to tell us that this
is in fact a more profitable way to do business. But at the end of the day, Sisodia
is an academic researcher studying business and an advocate for a particular
model of doing business, and his case is and must be centered on the particulars
of doing business.


@GG - this paragraph can be omitted
Whether he makes this case, unfortunately, must be measured
not against whether those already inclined to believe him come away feeling
confirmed in their inclination, but against the skeptical response, and the
skeptics in the room did not seem entirely sold on the proposition. Based on the
questions raised in the Q&A and on discussion with skeptics following the talk,
it seems that Sisodia is going to have to work a little harder to sell some
folks on the idea that "conscious" is a better way to do capitalism, and to sell
others on the idea that capitalism can be "conscious" in any interesting way.


We like to say that "a Long Now implies a Big Us." That is, as we consider
longer time scales our communities of interest naturally broaden. Sisodia's
model effectively reverses this equation: he claims that by broadening our
communities of interest, a company broadens the time scales in which it is
likely to operate. This is an inversion worth contemplating. Regardless of
whether Conscious Capitalism influences future management models, it's at least
heartening to see someone making the sincere case that broadening our
communities of interest is not only the right thing to do, it's the best way to
do business. And as long-term thinkers striving to be good ancestors, it's good
to be reminded that we might learn some useful things about the deep reaches of
time by broadening the communities we engage with in the here and now.
